So the prototyping phase, let's look
at what that is and how that fits in.
So you'll get to the end of the discovery
phase and you will have a pretty
clear idea of what's gonna be built,
who it's got to be built for,
any restrictions or
limitations on that, right?
So you're gonna feel well informed and
empowered, which is gonna give you enough
of an idea to go, okay, so
this is gonna be about 20 templates,
it's gonna be this kind of functionality,
you'll have a rough idea in your head.
That should be hopefully enough for you
to cost up your prototype phase, right?
Not your build, just to prototype phase.
So you will cost out your prototype phase.
So what goes into that?
Well, first of all,
what is your prototype phase?
It's where you design,
set the design direction, right, and
you establish the scope
of what's gonna be built.
This is by far the biggest design
part of this overall flow, obviously.
So why is it so important to do?
Well, prototyping can not only help brief
the developer as to what's gonna be built,
but it can also be used to
validate the design approach and
avoid costly changes once you've started
the bill, which is a lot more expensive.
Also helps to better define that build so
that the pricing can be more accurate.
What goes into a prototype?
We can do all kinds of things.
You've got to establish the aesthetics,
if there hasn't already been established.
So brand and that kind of thing.
You might want to do some high fidelity
design mock ups of some key pages.
You wanna get into some
wireframing of the site and
how it all the different templates
interact with one another.
And you'll probably wanna do some
usability testing to find out whether
people can actually use an interact this.
And you might wanna do some
aesthetic testing, and
we're gonna come on more
into what that is later.
So just to kind of give you again,
the minimum you can get away with doing in
that kind of scenario if you can't
afford to do all of those things and
you don't have time for all of those.
Obviously, your high fidelity
mock up is kind of a requirement.
The client needs to know the design
direction, the look and feel.
And you need to be able to demonstrate
the website's aesthetics and
how the website works within the site
structure and that kind of thing.
But I would also say as a minimum,
you need to be producing
a navigable what,
grayscale wireframe, right?
Which is include some
draft content in there,
mocks up the proposed functionality.
What's gonna be involved.
Now you might at this point choke a little
bit on this and go, well, hang on.
I mean, I'm working on really
low end projects here.
A grayscale wireframe that takes
takes time, yeah, it does.
But I think it's time you will get
back through clarity about the project
direction.
You'll get it back to avoid scope
creep later on down the line, etc.
If you're really, really tight,
do what I did only yesterday.
I had a client with a startup idea,
they only had a very couple
of few hours of my time.
They just wanted my thoughts and
my impressions about something and
I literally created all the pages of this
app as I saw it in notion, right, and
just dumped in what I thought would
go on each page, yeah, bullet points.
That is a type of wireframe,
it's a very basic one but it allowed
this client to navigate around the site
see what would have been on each page,
interlink those pages together.
It only took me a couple of
hours to do the entire site.
So you really can scale this to any
size project, obviously on a much
bigger project, the kind of projects
you work on, you're gonna want
a full interactive grayscale or
maybe even a high fidelity wireframe.
Although sometimes I think
high fidelity wireframes for
an entire application is a bit overkill.
But sometimes it can be worth doing,
especially if you're going to be
doing very in depth testing on it.
So, yeah that's another minimum thing.
Also there are some other minimum
things that I would do in this stage.
And again I know this feels like a lot
of work, but trust me it's worth it.
I would test your aesthetics,
color, typography, image styling,
right, all of those things are perceived
differently depending on your experiences
as we talked about earlier.
And if you don't test your aesthetics,
you're gonna get into arguments,
right, with your stakeholder.
Your stakeholders gonna go, people
won't like that color or that image.
And then you get into iteration hell.
If you test your aesthetics,
rather than have a discussion about them,
then that makes a world of difference.
You do away with all of
that in this debate, right?
So I test my aesthetics even if it
means I'm gonna run on a loss on
the project because it's predictable.
It's a predictable loss while
endless iterations and debates and
discussions could cost me way,
way more, right?
I will get into exactly how to
do that in the later section.
And then finally, I would suggest
some form of usability testing.
Again, is equally worthwhile for
exactly the same reason,
that it can get rid of a lot
of debate with the client.
And then of course, from the clients
point of view, if the user can't
find the content on the website, if they
don't understand the functionality and
comprehend the content,
then the websites failed.
So really some form of lightweight
testing is really worthwhile.
And you might be thinking, look,
I don't have Have the time or
money to test well, I would say don't
have the time or money not to test.
Carrying out this kind of
testing really isn't a luxury,
it's essential to getting the project
over the line really simply and easily.
And I will show you how to test in
the lightest possible way later on.